# COS226-hashtable-Python

Description:
A simple program featuring the implementation of two hash tables, which both derive their key-value pairs from an external csv file called "MOCK_DATA.csv". The first hash table uses the title of the movie from each row of data as the key, while the second table uses the movie quote from each row of data as the key. Both the linear probing hash table method as well as the linked list hash table method will be implemented, and each method will be improved upon at least once. A total of 5 commits will be made to the main hashTables.py file, where each commit features a new update or implementation in order to improve upon the previous version of the program. Results will be logged both with screenshots of the run results from each version, as well as in the commit notes for each of the 5 commits.

Files Overview:
- hashTables.py: The main file where the program will reside. Will have a total of 5 commits, each featuring a different update to the hash tables in order to improve upon the previous version
- hashScreenshots folder: contains screenshots of the data printed in the terminal after running each version
- "MOCK_DATA.csv": the .csv file containing the data that is being stored in the hash tables

Version 1 Report:
The first method, linear probing, has been implemented. The hash tables took approximately 30 seconds to be constructed, which isn't terrible, but also isn't great. Both hash tables also experienced a lot of collisions; I believe that a major cause for this is due to my hashMath function being very rudimentary. I plan to try and improve the hashMath function by making the prime number larger and implementing a for loop in the next version in order to hopefully better optimize the linear probing method.

Version 2 Report:
In this 2nd version I changed the hashMath function to use a for loop instead, with the hopes that the loop would improve efficiency and allow the program to take less time to run. However, I was proven wrong because the hash table construction time increased by about 8 seconds. However, with the hopes of trying to improve the runtime again after this discovery, I edited the size variable in the main function to be a prime number. Because of the nature of hash tables and prime numbers, this somehow caused the run time to go down by about 3 seconds, meaning this final iteration of version 2 takes about 35 seconds to construct the hash tables. However, there were also more collisions in this version, which I presume also has something to do with the for loop in the hashMath function. There is also still no wasted space, which I assume means the entirety of the dataset is being entered into the hash tables without any empty spaces remaining.

Version 3 Report:
This version experienced far better success than version 2. I reverted the hashMath function to the original state it was in in version 1, with the minor adjustment of changing the prime number again to something a bit smaller than the prime used in version 2, as well as assigning the prime number to its own variable. The main additions to this version include a collision counting function that is called in the main function for both hash tables, as well as a wasted space counter that is also called in the main function for both hash tables. Reverting the hashMath function to its V1 state, as well as moving the collision and wasted space features into their own functions seems to have drastically improved the runtime of the program. The program now takes about 18-19 seconds to run, had 2856 collisions and 4391 wasted space in the title hash table, as well as 4175 collisions and 4391 in the quote hash table. In the next version I plan to implement the linked list method in version 4.

Version 4 Report:
In version 4, a new linked list function is called in the main function for both hash tables. I am happy to see that it takes approximately half a second to construct the hash tables, as well as the much lower number of collisions for both hash tables, 32 for the title hash table, and 150 for the quote hash table. However, I am somewhat surprised by how much wasted space there is, which means I need to go back and triple check that there isn't anything logically wrong with how my functions are inserting the data. However, I believe the cause is most likely my hashMath function, seeing as it is quite rudimentary and could possibly be causing the data to be clumped together because of how I specified the keys to be calculated, especially the ord(hashData[0]) part. For version 5 I am going to experiment with using different math to try and reduce the amount of wasted space.
